docs(agentic-orchestration): add agent definitions and instances concept page (#9402)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/components/agentic-orchestration/agent-definitions-and-instances.md

---
id: agent-definitions-and-instances
title: Agent definitions and instances
sidebar_label: Definitions and instances
description: "Understand agent definitions and agent instances, the entities Camunda uses to model AI agents."
keywords: ["agentic ai", "AI agents", "agent definition", "agent instance"]
---

Understand agent definitions and agent instances, the entities Camunda uses to model AI agents.

## About

Camunda models AI agents using the same definition-and-instance relationship as [processes](/components/concepts/processes.md).

An **agent definition** describes a deployed agent, while an **agent instance** represents a specific running execution of that agent.

### Why definitions and instances are separate

> An agent is not the same as the BPMN element that hosts it, and it does not have the same lifecycle as an element instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An AI agent is not the same as the BPMN element that defines it, and it does not have the same lifecycle as an element instance.
```

> - A single [ad-hoc sub-process](/reference/glossary.md#ad-hoc-sub-process) or [AI Agent Task](/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent.md) element defines one agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A single [AI agent sub-process](/reference/glossary.md#ad-hoc-sub-process) or [AI Agent Task](/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent.md) element defines one agent.
```

- Each time the process activates that element, Camunda creates an element instance.
- The agent instance can be **reused across several element instances** within the same process instance.

> For example, in a process where the flow returns to the agent element after a user reply, the agent element is activated more than once. Each activation is a separate element instance, but they share the same agent instance so the agent keeps its memory and continues the same conversation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, in a process where the execution returns to the agent element after a user reply, the agent element is activated more than once. Each activation is a separate element instance, but they share the same agent instance so the agent keeps its memory and continues the same conversation.
```

> This reuse is what allows an agent to hold a multi-turn conversation across a loop in the process.

Reviewer 2: 🔧 Future: This would be a good place to add a screenshot to clarify the example with something visual.

## Agent definitions

> An agent definition is a first-class, queryable resource that Camunda creates when you deploy a process containing one or more agents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An AI agent definition is a first-class, queryable resource that Camunda creates when you deploy a process containing one or more agents.
```

> Camunda creates one agent definition per agent element in a deployed process, analogous to how a DMN deployment creates one decision definition per decision. An agent definition is a **structural descriptor** of the agent, not a store of its runtime configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Camunda creates one agent definition per agent element in a deployed process, analogous to how a DRD deployment creates one decision definition per decision. An agent definition is a **structural descriptor** of the agent, not a store of its runtime configuration.
```

An agent definition identifies an agent across process versions through a stable agent definition key. With this key, you can inventory deployed agents, aggregate per-agent metrics in Optimize, and confirm that an agent exists before starting one of its instances.

### What an agent definition contains

An agent definition contains the following data:

- **Agent definition key**: Stable identifier for the agent across process definition versions.

> - [**Agent type**](/components/agentic-orchestration/ai-agents.md#agent-types): One of ad-hoc sub-process, AI Agent Task, or external agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [**Agent type**](/components/agentic-orchestration/ai-agents.md#agent-types): One of AI Agent sub-process, AI Agent Task, or external agent.
```

- **Name**: Human-readable name of the agent element.
- **Process definition key**: The process definition the agent belongs to.
- **Tenant**: The tenant the agent definition belongs to.

The system prompt and model are [FEEL expressions](/components/modeler/feel/what-is-feel.md) evaluated when an instance is created. They are not stored in the agent definition, because they can resolve to different values for each instance.

### Mark an element as an agent

To ensure an element is recognized as an agent, you **must mark it** in the BPMN model with the `zeebe:agentDefinition` extension element. How you do this depends on your agent type:

1. **Native agents**: Camunda's own AI Agent connector templates add this marker for you.

> 2. **External agents**: You must add the marker explicitly so that Camunda registers it as an agent.

Reviewer: @korthout, should we change that to `External Agent template`? With the ootb template, users don't need to think about this extension property

Reviewer 2: Agreed. But still, I think we should also specify the exact marker to support external modelers. We do this in our BPMN docs, typically. Example: https://docs.camunda.io/docs/next/components/modeler/bpmn/service-tasks/#xml-representation

Author: I reworked the section and added details about how to mark it when using an external modeler.

> | Ad-hoc sub-process | An [AI Agent Sub-process](/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent-subprocess.md) using the AI Agent connector. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| AI agent sub-process | An [AI Agent Sub-process](/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent-subprocess.md) using the AI Agent connector. |
```

Reviewer: https://github.com/camunda/company-handbook/blob/main/departments/marketing/terminology/references/ai-glossary.md#ai-agent

### Reuse an agent across processes

To reuse the same agent across multiple process definitions, use a [call activity](/components/modeler/bpmn/call-activities/call-activities.md). Place the agent in one process definition and call it from the parent processes. This produces a single agent definition for the reused agent, so its metrics aggregate into one registry entry.

Duplicating the same element template directly across several process definitions creates a separate agent definition for each copy, with no cross-definition aggregation.

## Agent instances

> An agent instance is a specific runtime execution of an agent definition, created when an agent element is activated. It is identified by an agent instance key and stores its state, including the conversation, tool calls, and reasoning, in an agent context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An agent instance is a specific runtime execution of an agent definition that can be created for an active agent element. It is identified by an agent instance key, and keeps its state -
conversation, tool calls, reasoning - in an agent context.
```
Align with https://github.com/camunda/company-handbook/pull/1160

You can reuse an agent instance across multiple element instances within the same process instance, allowing the agent to maintain a multi-turn conversation when the process loops back to it.

For [Camunda AI agents](/reference/glossary.md#camunda-ai-agent), both the AI agent sub-process and AI Agent Task types, the AI Agent connector automatically creates the agent instance through the [Agent Instance API](/apis-tools/orchestration-cluster-api-rest/specifications/create-agent-instance.api.mdx) as the first step in handling the job for an active agent element. For [external agents](/reference/glossary.md#external-agent), the external runtime creates the instance itself by calling the same API, which can happen at any point while the element is active.

> ### Agent context and memory

Reviewer: 💭 We should mention that for production use cases, we recommend storing the agent context as a document.

Author: Added as a tip box

Reviewer 3: Given that documents have a TTL, (indefinitely) long-running agents are not well-suited in combination with documents, therefore we did not add a default recommendation in the past.

If we add that recommendation, I'd primarily add it to the AI Agent docs, not to this concepts page, but I'm not convinced we should document it that way before we either improve the documents TTL concepts or have a better default storage approach (e.g. the history api itself).

Author: I am removing the recommendation then.

- **Reuse the context** to continue an existing conversation. The process passes the stored context back to the agent element, and the same agent instance handles each activation.
- **Start with a fresh context** on each activation. The agent element receives an empty context, so Camunda creates a new agent instance every time the element is entered, and no memory carries over.

Where the context is stored depends on the memory storage type. With **In Process** storage, the full context lives in process variables. With **Camunda Document Storage**, the context is stored as a document and the process variable holds only a reference and metadata. See [memory](/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent-subprocess.md#memory) for configuration details.

### Data available in Operate

Operate surfaces agent instance data so you can monitor an agent as part of its process instance. See [monitor your AI agents with Operate](/components/agentic-orchestration/evaluate-agents/monitor-ai-agents.md) for a hands-on guide to inspecting this data.

The following data is available for an agent instance in Operate:

> | Data                 | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

Reviewer: ➕ We have also tools definitions in operate

Author: Added to the table

| -------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Agent instance key   | The unique identifier of the agent instance. Use it to look up or interact with the agent through the [Agent Instance API](/apis-tools/orchestration-cluster-api-rest/specifications/create-agent-instance.api.mdx). |
| Agent state          | The current execution state of the agent, such as initializing, tool discovery, thinking, tool calling, or idle. The state is also highlighted on the BPMN diagram.                                                  |

> | Usage metrics        | Token consumption, tool call count, and model call count. Model calls are shown against the configured limit, so you can see how close the agent is to its guardrail.                                                |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Usage metrics        | Token consumption, tool call count, and model call count. Model calls are shown against the configured limit, so you can see how close the agent is to its limit.                                                |
```

💭 I believe we wanted to communicate these as `limits` - we had some discussions about that

---
id: agent-definitions-and-instances
title: Agent definitions and instances
sidebar_label: Definitions and instances
description: "Understand agent definitions and agent instances, the entities Camunda uses to model AI agents."
keywords: ["agentic ai", "AI agents", "agent definition", "agent instance"]
---

Understand agent definitions and agent instances, the entities Camunda uses to model AI agents.

## About

Camunda models AI agents using the same definition-and-instance relationship as [processes](/components/concepts/processes.md).

An **agent definition** describes a deployed agent, while an **agent instance** represents a specific running execution of that agent.

### Why definitions and instances are separate

An AI agent is not the same as the BPMN element that defines it, and it does not have the same lifecycle as an element instance.

> - A single [AI Agent Sub-process](/reference/glossary.md#ad-hoc-sub-process) or [AI Agent Task](/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent.md) element defines one agent.

Reviewer 2: :x: Incorrect: it could also be a External agent.

- Each time the process activates that element, Camunda creates an element instance.
- The agent instance can be **reused across several element instances** within the same process instance.

For example, in a process where the execution returns to the agent element after a user reply, the agent element is activated more than once. Each activation is a separate element instance, but they share the same agent instance so the agent keeps its memory and continues the same conversation.
This reuse is what allows an agent to hold a multi-turn conversation across a loop in the process.

## Agent definitions

An AI agent definition is a first-class, queryable resource that Camunda creates when you deploy a process containing one or more agents.

Camunda creates one agent definition per agent element in a deployed process, analogous to how a [DRD](/reference/glossary.md#drd-decision-requirements-diagram) deployment creates one decision definition per decision. An agent definition is a **structural descriptor** of the agent, not a store of its runtime configuration.

> An agent definition identifies an agent across process versions through a stable agent definition key. With this key, you can inventory deployed agents, aggregate per-agent metrics in Optimize, and confirm that an agent exists before starting one of its instances.

Reviewer 2: >An agent definition identifies an agent across process versions

:x: Incorrect: Each process version gets its own agent definition. So, they are bound to the specific process version.

### What an agent definition contains

An agent definition contains the following data:

- **Agent definition key**: Stable identifier for the agent across process definition versions.
- [**Agent type**](/components/agentic-orchestration/ai-agents.md#agent-types): One of AI Agent Sub-process, AI Agent Task, or external agent.
- **Name**: Human-readable name of the agent element.
- **Process definition key**: The process definition the agent belongs to.

> - **Tenant**: The tenant the agent definition belongs to.

Reviewer 2: I think this list is incomplete. @ce-dmelnych Could you provide the full list please?

Reviewer 4: Here is the planned list of properties per the API spec for the AgentDefinition endpoints:
https://github.com/camunda/camunda/blob/ec91aa8ff8154a58b3a9bdc6512acc6797577a8f/zeebe/gateway-protocol/src/main/proto/v2/agent-definitions.yaml#L197-L232

- `agentDefinitionKey`: The unique key for this agent definition.
- `agentType`: One of `AI_AGENT_SUB_PROCESS`, `AI_AGENT_TASK`, or `EXTERNAL_AGENT`.
- `name`: Human-readable name of the process element that owns the agent definition (falls back to `elementId` when the element has no BPMN name configured).
- `elementId`: The BPMN element ID of the process element that owns the agent definition.
- `processDefinitionId`: The BPMN process ID of the process definition that owns the agent definition.
- `processDefinitionKey`: The key of the process definition that owns the agent definition.
- `processDefinitionVersion`: The version of the process definition that owns the agent definition.
- `processDefinitionVersionTag`: The version tag of the process definition that owns the agent definition.
- `tenantId`: The tenant ID of this agent definition.

One important correction for `agentDefinitionKey` is **not** stable across process definition versions — a new key is assigned for the same process element on every process definition version.

Author: Updated!

| Agent state          | The current execution state of the agent, such as initializing, tool discovery, thinking, tool calling, or idle. The state is also highlighted on the BPMN diagram.                                                  |
| Usage metrics        | Token consumption, tool call count, and model call count. Model calls are shown against the configured limit, so you can see how close the agent is to its limit.                                                    |
| Model                | The LLM the agent is running against.                                                                                                                                                                                |
| System prompt        | The system prompt the agent was configured with.                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Tool definitions     | The [tools](/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent-tool-definitions.md) available to the agent, resolved from the agent's ad-hoc sub-process.                                           |

> | Conversation history | The decision trail of the agent execution: user prompts, assistant messages, the tools the agent selected with its reasoning, and tool calls with their inputs and results.                                          |

Reviewer 2: @fabiopaini-camunda I believe we need to add configuration to this right?

Reviewer 5: Yes, the conversation history will also include the initial agent configuration and any mid-conversation configuration changes. Configuration history items can include:
- system prompt
- model/provider
- tool definitions
- limits

Since mid-conversation configuration changes will not be possible (at least for now) using our own connector implementation, I think it is not worth mentioning it now. I think it would be enough to have something like:
```suggestion
| Conversation history | The decision trail of the agent execution: initial configuration, user prompts, assistant messages, the tools the agent selected with its reasoning, and tool calls with their inputs and results.                                          |
```

sidebar_label: Definitions and instances
description: "Understand agent definitions and agent instances, the entities Camunda uses to model AI agents."
keywords: ["agentic ai", "AI agents", "agent definition", "agent instance"]
---

Understand agent definitions and agent instances, the entities Camunda uses to model AI agents.

## About

Camunda models AI agents using the same definition-and-instance relationship as [processes](/components/concepts/processes.md).

An **agent definition** describes a deployed agent, while an **agent instance** represents a specific running execution of that agent.

### Why definitions and instances are separate

An agent is not the same as the BPMN element that hosts it, and it does not have the same lifecycle as an element instance.

- A single [AI agent sub-process](/reference/glossary.md#ad-hoc-sub-process) or [AI Agent Task](/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent.md) element defines one agent.
- Each time the process activates that element, Camunda creates an agent instance.
- The agent definition can be **reused across several agent instances** within the same process instance.

> For example, in a process where the flow returns to the agent element after a user reply, the agent element is activated more than once. Each activation is a separate agent instance, but they share the same agent definition so the agent keeps its memory and continues the same conversation.

Reviewer 2: ❌ Correction

```suggestion
For example, in a process where the flow returns to the agent element after a user reply, the agent element is activated more than once. Each activation is a separate element instance, but they share the same agent instance so the agent keeps its memory and continues the same conversation.
```

- **Name**: Human-readable name of the agent element.
- **Process definition key**: The process definition the agent belongs to.
- **Tenant**: The tenant the agent definition belongs to.

The system prompt and model are [FEEL expressions](/components/modeler/feel/what-is-feel.md) evaluated when an instance is created. They are not stored in the agent definition, because they can resolve to different values for each instance.

### Agent types

Camunda creates an agent definition for each of the following agent types:

| Agent type           | How it is defined                                                                                                                          |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| AI agent sub-process | An [AI Agent Sub-process](/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent-subprocess.md) using the AI Agent connector. |
| AI Agent Task        | An [AI Agent Task](/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent.md) service task using the AI Agent connector.      |

> | External agent       | An [external agent](/reference/glossary.md#external-agent) that runs its loop in an external runtime, such as LangGraph or CrewAI.         |

Reviewer 2: 🔧 Inconsistent capitalization of the agent types

Author: Reworked that section

For an element to be recognized as an agent, it **must be marked** in the BPMN model with the `zeebe:agentDefinition` extension element. This works differently depending on your agent type:

1. **Native agents**: Camunda's own AI Agent connector templates add this marker for you.
2. **External agents**: You must add the marker explicitly so that Camunda registers it as an agent.

### Reuse an agent across processes

To reuse the same agent across multiple process definitions, use a [call activity](/components/modeler/bpmn/call-activities/call-activities.md). Place the agent in one process definition and call it from the parent processes. This produces a single agent definition for the reused agent, so its metrics aggregate into one registry entry.

Duplicating the same element template directly across several process definitions creates a separate agent definition for each copy, with no cross-definition aggregation.

## Agent instances

An agent instance is a specific runtime execution of an agent, created when a process instance first activates the agent element.

> When an agent instance is created, Camunda generates an agent instance key that identifies it. For [Camunda AI agents](/reference/glossary.md#camunda-ai-agent), the engine creates the instance. For [external agents](/reference/glossary.md#external-agent), the external runtime creates it by calling the [Agent Instance API](/apis-tools/orchestration-cluster-api-rest/specifications/create-agent-instance.api.mdx).

Reviewer 2: 🔧 We might want to highlight that the agent instance of the types 'AI agent sub-process' and 'AI Agent Task' are created automatically by AI Agent Connector using the same API.

| Data                 | Description                                                                                                                                                                 |
| -------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Agent state          | The current execution state of the agent, such as initializing, tool discovery, thinking, tool calling, or idle. The state is also highlighted on the BPMN diagram.         |
| Usage metrics        | Token consumption, tool call count, and model call count. Model calls are shown against the configured limit, so you can see how close the agent is to its guardrail.       |
| Model                | The LLM the agent is running against.                                                                                                                                       |
| System prompt        | The system prompt the agent was configured with.                                                                                                                            |

> | Conversation history | The decision trail of the agent execution: user prompts, assistant messages, the tools the agent selected with its reasoning, and tool calls with their inputs and results. |

Reviewer 2: 🔧 The Agent Instance's key is also presented - allowing the user to look it up or interact with it via the API.

Author: Added an Agent instance key row to the Data available in Operate table. (7979648cf1291060f57c7b6e5e93dd678f345121)

#### Agent states

The agent state tells you whether an agent is actively working or stuck. Camunda exposes agent state through the agent instance record, fed by status updates as the agent runs.

| State          | Meaning                                                                         |
| -------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Initializing   | The agent instance is being set up.                                             |
| Tool discovery | The agent is resolving which tools are available to it.                         |
| Thinking       | The agent is reasoning with the model to decide its next step.                  |
| Tool calling   | The agent is calling one or more tools.                                         |

> | Idle           | The agent is not currently working, for example while waiting for a user reply. |

Reviewer 2: 🔧 Idle typically represents that the process instance has moved away from the Agent element and the agent is not currently working. It can be continued when the process instance activates the element again.

Reviewer 6: 🔧 This agent status overview should also contain "Completed". The agent instance becomes completed when the process instance is completed or terminated.

Author: Updated the Idle description and added a Completed state row per both comments. (7979648cf1291060f57c7b6e5e93dd678f345121)

#### Conversation history and loops

The conversation history captures the full reasoning chain of an agent execution, grouped by loop. A loop is one pass of the agent's feedback cycle: the model reasons over the current messages, optionally calls tools, and receives the tool results that become the input for the next loop.

> Grouping the history by loop makes it easier to reference a specific point in an agent's execution. Rather than describing a moment in time, you can refer to a loop by its iteration, for example "on loop 5 the agent called this tool."

Reviewer 2: 🔧 Minor correction on the terminology

```suggestion
Grouping the history by loop makes it easier to reference a specific point in an agent's execution. Rather than describing a moment in time, you can refer to a loop by its iteration, for example "on loop iteration 5 the agent called this tool."
```

This reuse is what allows an agent to hold a multi-turn conversation across a loop in the process.

## Agent definitions

An AI agent definition is a first-class, queryable resource that Camunda creates when you deploy a process containing one or more agents.

Camunda creates one agent definition per agent element in a deployed process, analogous to how a [DRD](/reference/glossary.md#drd-decision-requirements-diagram) deployment creates one decision definition per decision. An agent definition is a **structural descriptor** of the agent, not a store of its runtime configuration.

An agent definition identifies an agent across process versions through a stable agent definition key. With this key, you can inventory deployed agents, aggregate per-agent metrics in Optimize, and confirm that an agent exists before starting one of its instances.

### What an agent definition contains

An agent definition contains the following data:

> - **Agent definition key**: Stable identifier for the agent across process definition versions.

Reviewer 4: @aleksander-dytko, @afgambin

> - **Agent definition key**: Stable identifier for the agent across process definition versions.

but Zeebe `…Key`s are normally unique per record/version (`decisionKey` changes per version; `decisionId` is the stable identifier).

❓ Do we want:
- (a) a per-version `agentDefinitionKey` plus a stable `agentDefinitionId` (decision-like), or
- (b) a genuinely stable key reused across versions?

> - [**Agent type**](/components/agentic-orchestration/ai-agents.md#agent-types): One of AI Agent Sub-process, AI Agent Task, or external agent.

Reviewer 3: 💭 Is this API already designed? How would we decide if this would be an AI Agent Sub-process or an AI Agent Task, especially in hybrid setups where the job worker name is not known?
Do we need to make the distinction Camunda/External agent on the definition level?

Reviewer 2: I think this discussion can be resolved. This will be set by Modeler, see https://github.com/camunda/connectors/issues/8176 for details. @ce-dmelnych Is there already an issue to set the External agent type through a Modeler element template ([as mentioned here](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-docs/pull/9402/changes#r3636602183))?

Reviewer 4: Here is the issue for modelers: https://github.com/camunda/camunda-modeler/issues/6089

Added it to our "Core features" project for tracking, however for implementation of modeler-related tasks, I assume, there should be a dedicated one.

@aleksander-dytko could you support us by adding it to the proper board/project and assigning it to a team that can support us with implementing it?

Reviewer: @ce-dmelnych I won't be able to help here as this is more implementation level coordination

- **Name**: Human-readable name of the agent element.
- **Process definition key**: The process definition the agent belongs to.
- **Tenant**: The tenant the agent definition belongs to.

> The system prompt and model are [FEEL expressions](/components/modeler/feel/what-is-feel.md) evaluated when an instance is created. They are not stored in the agent definition, because they can resolve to different values for each instance.

Reviewer 3: 💭 As commented on the glossary, is this information necessary (it is an implementation detail of our agents)?

Author: Good point, I’m removing it from this page. Leaving it to @aleksander-dytko , as the DRI for agent terminology, to decide whether to include it in the glossary.

### Mark an element as an agent

To ensure an element is recognized as an agent, you **must mark it** in the BPMN model with the `zeebe:agentDefinition` extension element. How you do this depends on your agent type:

1. **Native agents**: Camunda's own AI Agent connector templates add this marker for you.
2. **External agents**: You must add the marker explicitly so that Camunda registers it as an agent.

### Reuse an agent across processes

To reuse the same agent across multiple process definitions, use a [call activity](/components/modeler/bpmn/call-activities/call-activities.md). Place the agent in one process definition and call it from the parent processes. This produces a single agent definition for the reused agent, so its metrics aggregate into one registry entry.

> Duplicating the same element template directly across several process definitions creates a separate agent definition for each copy, with no cross-definition aggregation.

Reviewer 3: 💭 Is "element template" (the JSON template) the right term here? Wouldn't I duplicate a (BPMN) element?

Author: Updated to "BPMN element"

| Initializing   | The agent instance is being set up.                                                                                                                                 |
| Tool discovery | The agent is resolving which tools are available to it.                                                                                                             |
| Thinking       | The agent is reasoning with the model to decide its next step.                                                                                                      |
| Tool calling   | The agent is calling one or more tools.                                                                                                                             |
| Idle           | The process instance has moved away from the agent element, so the agent isn't currently working. It resumes when the process instance activates the element again. |
| Completed      | The agent instance is completed, because the process instance completed or terminated.                                                                              |

#### Conversation history and loops

> The conversation history captures the full reasoning chain of an agent execution, grouped by loop. A loop is one pass of the agent's feedback cycle: the model reasons over the current messages, optionally calls tools, and receives the tool results that become the input for the next loop.

Reviewer 3: 🔧 As discussed [here](https://camunda.slack.com/archives/C0AH08C7UA2/p1783002546391629):

`loop` = the whole thing
(loop) `iteration` = one step in the loop

Author: Updated the section to use `loop` for the whole feedback cycle and `iteration` for a single pass.

An agent is not the same as the BPMN element that hosts it, and it does not have the same lifecycle as an element instance.

- A single [AI agent sub-process](/reference/glossary.md#ad-hoc-sub-process) or [AI Agent Task](/components/connectors/out-of-the-box-connectors/agentic-ai-aiagent.md) element defines one agent.
- Each time the process activates that element, Camunda creates an element instance.

> - The agent instance can be **reused across several element instances** within the same process instance.

Reviewer 2: 👍 Good improvement!

- **[External agents](/reference/glossary.md#external-agent)**: The External Agent template adds the marker.

If you model outside Camunda Modeler, add the marker to the BPMN XML yourself.

#### XML representation

The marker is an extension element on the [ad-hoc sub-process](/components/modeler/bpmn/ad-hoc-subprocesses/ad-hoc-subprocesses.md) or [service task](/components/modeler/bpmn/service-tasks/service-tasks.md) that hosts the agent. Its `agentType` attribute declares the [agent type](#what-an-agent-definition-contains), and accepts `aiAgentSubProcess`, `aiAgentTask`, or `external`.

An AI Agent Sub-process marked as an agent:

```xml
<bpmn:adHocSubProcess id="research-agent" name="Research agent">
  <bpmn:extensionElements>
    <zeebe:agentDefinition agentType="aiAgentSubProcess" />
  </bpmn:extensionElements>
</bpmn:adHocSubProcess>
```

An external agent marked as an agent:

```xml
<bpmn:serviceTask id="research-agent" name="Research agent">
  <bpmn:extensionElements>
    <zeebe:agentDefinition agentType="external" />
  </bpmn:extensionElements>
</bpmn:serviceTask>

> ```

Reviewer 2: 👍 This is great!
